E-Library - Information At Your Fingertips: Printer Friendly




    

			393 Phil. 616
			






[ G.R. No. 131411, August 29, 2000 ]


GLORIA A. ANACLETO, petitioner, vs. ALEXANDER VAN TWEST and/or EUROCEANIC RAINBOW ENTERPRISES PHILIPPINES, INC., respondents.

D E C I S I O N




MENDOZA, J.:


This is a petition for review on 
certiorari
 of the decision of the Court of Appeals, dated June 20, 1997.  The facts are not disputed.  They are as follows:


On February 6, 1995, a complaint for reconveyance of title was filed in 
the name of Alexander Van Twest and Euroceanic Rainbow Enterprises 
Philippines, Inc. (Euroceanic) against petitioner Gloria A. Anacleto and
 Isaias M. Bongar.  The complaint filed by Atty. Ernesto V. Perez stated
 that Alexander Van Twest âhas been reported missing since June 16, 1992
 but is duly represented herein by undersigned counsel as his agent 
and/or general counsel.â


On March 31, 1995, Atty. Perez, in representation of Van Twest, entered 
into a compromise agreement with Anacleto and Bongar, then represented 
by Atty. Diosdado M. Allado.  The text of the agreement reads:
[1]



COMPROMISE AGREEMENT




    This Agreement executed this 31st day of March, 1995 at Makati, Metro Manila, by and between:
  


 ALEXANDER VAN TWEST, Belizean, of legal age with address at 29 
Montclair Street, Merville Park, ParaÃ±aque, Metro Manila, represented 
herein by Atty. Ernesto V. Perez (hereinafter referred to as âthe 
plaintiffâ). 



    -and-
  


 GLORIA A. ANACLETO and ISAIAS M. BONGAR, Filipinos, of legal age 
with address at c/o 3rd Floor, Tower B, Gold Loop Twin Towers, #1 Gold 
Loop Street, Ortigas Center, Pasig, Metro Manila, represented herein by 
Atty. Diosdado Jose M. Allado (hereinafter referred to as âthe 
defendantsâ). 



  WITNESSETH:  That -
  



  WHEREAS, the plaintiff Van Twest and defendant Anacleto have instituted several actions against each other in the past.
  



  WHEREAS, the plaintiff Van Twest instituted the present action for 
reconveyance of real property, annulment of deed of sale and accounting 
of income of property.
  



  WHEREAS, the parties desire to buy peace and wish to avoid a protracted litigation in this case.
  



  NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing and the further 
covenants hereinafter set forth, the parties agree as follows:
  



  1.  Plaintiff shall be paid the sum of FOUR MILLION EIGHT HUNDRED 
THOUSAND PESOS (P4,800,000.00) in accordance with the following 
schedule:
  





      a. 
Initial payment
 - FIVE HUNDRED THOUSAND PESOS 
(P500,000.00) shall be paid to the plaintiff by defendant BONGAR upon 
the signing and due execution of this Compromise Agreement, Provided, 
however, that the initial payment by defendant BONGAR shall be delivered
 into the custody and possession of a third party, Atty. Crispulo C. 
Rosacia, who shall act as escrow-trustee of the parties and who shall 
only deliver the said initial payment to the plaintiff through 
plaintiffâs counsel upon the filing in Court of this Compromise 
Agreement. 



      b. The balance of FOUR MILLION THREE HUNDRED THOUSAND PESOS 
(P4,300,000.00) shall be paid by defendant ANACLETO as follows:
    



    Second payment - ONE MILLION THREE HUNDRED THOUSAND PESOS 
(P11,300,000.00) within sixty (60) days after the date of the first 
payment.
    



    Third payment - ONE MILLION PESOS (P1,000,000.00) within forty-five (45) days after the date of the second payment.
    



    Fourth payment - ONE MILLION PESOS (P1,000,000.00) within forty-five (45) days after the date of the third payment.
    



    Fifth payment - ONE MILLION PESOS (P1,000,000.00) within forty-five (45) days after the date of the fourth payment.
    





  2. The initial payment by defendant BONGAR shall be made in cash.  The
 five payments on the balance shall be covered by post-dated checks 
drawn by defendant ANACLETO as payable to ATTY. ERNESTO V. PEREZ who 
shall hold and account for said payments in trust for plaintiff Van 
Twest.
  



  3. This Compromise Agreement shall not affect nor prejudice any case 
or cases between the parties not specifically referred to herein.
  



  4. Upon delivery of the initial payment made by defendant BONGAR and 
delivered to the escrow-trustee of the parties, the parties shall seek 
Court approval of this Compromise Agreement and the cancellation or 
lifting of the notice of lis pendens issued by the Court over the 
property subject of the action.
  



  5. The signatories to this Agreement hereby represent and warrant that they are duly authorized to execute this Agreement.
  



  6. The parties or their assigns hereby waive, renounce and forever 
quitclaim all their respective claims and counterclaims subject of the 
instant action as well as those that may arise therefrom, in connection 
therewith or in relation thereto.
  



  7. The foregoing covenants are not contrary to law, morals, or public 
policy and the parties bind themselves to comply strictly with their 
undertakings.
  





On April 6, 1995, the trial court rendered judgment based on the 
compromise agreement.  Petitioner later filed a manifestation, 
submitting a copy of a special power of attorney (SPA).


On June 2, 1995, petitioner, represented by new counsel, Atty. Marvin L.
 Herrera, filed an urgent omnibus motion asking the court to order Atty.
 Perez to submit an SPA and, in the meantime, to defer petitionerâs 
compliance with her obligation under the compromise agreement.


In his comment dated June 23, 1995, Atty. Perez admitted he had no SPA 
from Van Twest to enter into a compromise agreement.  However, he 
claimed that petitionerâs former counsel, the law firm of Salonga, 
Hernandez and Allado, had been informed of this fact.


In an order dated March 17, 1996, the trial court denied petitionerâs 
motion on the ground that she was estopped to question the validity of 
the compromise agreement considering that, during the negotiations which
 led to the signing of the compromise agreement, Atty. Perez had 
disclosed the fact that he had no SPA.


On May 10, 1996, petitioner filed a motion to vacate the judgment, but 
her motion was denied by the trial court.  Her motion for 
reconsideration was likewise denied.  She then filed a notice of appeal,
 but it was denied by the trial court on the ground that the notice of 
appeal was filed twelve days late.  Petitioner filed a petition for 
certiorari

 in the Court of Appeals questioning the denial of her notice of appeal 
and asking that the order of the trial court denying her motion to 
vacate the compromise agreement be set aside.  As her petition was 
dismissed by the appellate court, petitioner filed this petition for 
review on 
certiorari
.


We find the petition meritorious.


The basic issue to be resolved here is whether a party who enters into a
 compromise agreement with another allegedly represented by a lawyer who
 has no authority to institute a litigation, much less enter into a 
compromise agreement, is estopped from questioning the validity of such 
agreement.


Under the facts of this case, and for reasons to be hereafter discussed, we hold that she is not.



First.
  A compromise is a contract whereby parties, by 
making reciprocal concessions, avoid a litigation or put an end to one 
already commenced.
[2]
  Like 
any other contract, therefore, it must comply with the requisites 
provided in Art. 1318 of the Civil Code, to wit:  (1) consent of the 
contracting parties; (2) object certain which is the subject matter of 
the contract; and (3) cause of the obligation which is established.
[3]



Now, it is admitted by Atty. Perez that his only authority to represent 
Van Twest and Euroceanic is the retainer agreement he had with Van 
Twest.  This agreement reads:
[4]



11 July 1990


MR. ALEXANDER VAN TWEST

Manila


Dear. Mr. Van Twest:


Thank you for deciding to retain our law firm as general counsel to handle your civil and criminal cases.


The retainer will amount to P7,500.00 per month.  In order to facilitate
 your account, we shall bill this retainer monthly, starting July, 1990,
 if agreeable to you.


The retainer will cover office conferences, drawing of ordinary business
 documents, contracts, deeds, and the like as well as legal advise not 
requiring substantial time expense on our part.  The retainer will not 
cover the trial of any litigated matters in court or before any 
administrative body.  The cases that we will handle for you shall be 
subject of a separate progressive billings.  In such cases we cannot 
usually determine in advance the amount of work that will be required.  
However, any extraordinary matters will be discussed with you in advance
 so that you may have an estimate of the amount that might be involved 
before making any commitments.


If the above arrangement is acceptable to you, please sign, date and 
return the enclosed duplicate copy of this letter for our file.


Very truly yours,


MARTINEZ & PEREZ


LAW OFFICES


by:


(Signed)
  

  ERNESTO V. PEREZ


The above arrangement is acceptable:




    (Signed)
      

    10 July 1990
  





It is clear from this agreement that Atty. Perezâs authority to 
represent Van Twest does not include a special authority to enter into 
the questioned compromise agreement as required by Rule 138, Â§23 which 
provides:



Authority of attorneys to bind clients.
 -Attorneys have 
authority to bind their clients in any case by any agreement in relation
 thereto made in writing, and in taking appeals, and in all matters of 
ordinary judicial procedure.  But they cannot, without special 
authority, compromise their clientâs litigation, or receive anything in 
discharge of a clientâs claim but the full amount in cash. 



    Indeed, a special power of attorney constituting Atty. Perez as 
attorney-in-fact is necessary.  Art. 1878 of the Civil Code provides:
  





      ART. 1878.  Special powers of attorney are necessary in the following cases:
    



      (1)  To make such payments as are not usually considered as acts of administration;
   



      (2)  To effect novations which put an end to obligations already in existence at the time the agency was constituted;
   



      (3)  To compromise, to submit questions to arbitration, to 
renounce the right to appeal from a judgment, to waive objections to the
 venue of an action or to abandon a prescription already acquired;
   





. . . .


It is noteworthy that the action for reconveyance filed by Atty. Perez 
was brought not only in behalf of Van Twest but also of Euroceanic, a 
juridical person from which he should have secured the necessary 
authority to institute this case and enter into a compromise agreement. 
 The law specifically requires that juridical persons may enter into a 
compromise only in the form and with the requisites which may be 
necessary to alienate their property.
[5]
  The power to compromise or settle claims in favor of or against the corporation is vested in the board of directors.
[6]

  Hence, in the absence of any authorization from the board of directors
 of Euroceanic, Atty. Perez could not file any suit in its behalf, 
regardless of the fact that Van Twest was the former chairman of its 
board.


As Atty. Perez had no authority to litigate or enter into a compromise 
agreement in behalf of Van Twest or Euroceanic, the compromise agreement
 is void.  In Quiban v. Butalid,
[7]

  it was held that a compromise agreement entered into by a person not 
duly authorized to do so by the principal is void and has no legal 
effect.


The same is true as regards the judgment based on the compromise agreement.  In Alviar v. Court of First Instance of La Union,
[8]

  it was held that a judgment based upon a compromise entered by an 
attorney without a special authority from the client is null and void.  
 Such judgment may be impugned and its execution may be enjoined in any 
proceeding by the party against whom it is sought to be enforced.  This 
principle was reiterated in Jacinto v. Montesa
[9]
  and Cosmic Lumber Corporation v. Court of Appeals.
[10]



Second.  The Court of Appeals held that petitioner is estopped to deny 
the authority of Atty. Perez to represent Van Twest because petitioner 
knew from the start of the negotiations for the compromise agreement 
that Atty. Perez had no special power of attorney.


The appellate court appears to have based its finding on the affidavit 
of Atty. Crispulo C. Rosacia, the lawyer who mediated the compromise 
agreement between Atty. Perez and petitionerâs former counsel, Atty. 
Diosdado M. Allado.  The affidavit states:
[11]



AFFIDAVIT


I, CRISPULO C. ROSACIA, Filipino, of legal age and with offices at 
Penthouse, Northeast Tower, the Goldloop towers, One Goldloop Plaza, 
Ortigas Center, Pasig City, after being duly sworn, depose and state 
that:


1.  I was served a subpoena from Branch 7 of the Regional Trial Court of
 Manila to appear and testify in the case entitled:  Alexander Van Twest
 vs. Gloria Anacleto and Isaias Bongar, Civil Case No. 95-72826 pending 
before said Court.  In obedience to the subpoena, I appeared before the 
said Court on December 6, 1995 and learned that I was subpoenaed to 
attest regarding the events and discussions prior to the execution of 
the compromise agreement among the parties in said case, particularly on
 the matter of the representation of the plaintiff by Atty. Ernesto V. 
Perez.  I have been asked to execute an affidavit in lieu of testimony 
regarding the aforesaid matter.  Hence, this affidavit.


2.  I am a practicing lawyer and partner at the Villareal Rosacia DiÃ±o 
Samson and Patag Law Offices with offices at the Penthouse, Northeast 
Tower, the Goldloop Towers, One Goldloop Plaza, Ortigas Center, Pasig 
City.


3.  Sometime around February or March 1995, I was requested by Atty. 
Ernesto V. Perez, counsel of Alexander Van Twest, to check with Atty. 
Roberto L. Mendoza, a partner of the Salonga Hernandez and Allado Law 
Offices if their clients, Gloria Anacleto and Isaias Bongar, would 
consider amicable settlement in the case of Alexander Van Twest vs. 
Gloria Anacleto and Isaias Bongar, Civil Case No. 95-72826 of the 
Regional Trial Court of Manila.


4.  Atty. Mendoza informed me over the telephone that they are open to 
settlement and Atty. Allado came up to our office to discuss it.  I then
 set up a meeting between Atty. Perez and Atty. Allado at my office.


5.  During the initial meeting in my office, Atty. Allado asked Atty. 
Perez as to the person he would be talking to regarding settlement.  
Atty. Perez said that his client Van Twest is missing as he alleged in 
the complaint and that he is the representative of Van Twest as to the 
latterâs properties in the Philippines involved in pending litigation.  
Asked if he holds a special power of attorney, Atty. Perez said that he 
does not have one and that he acts on the basis of his retainer 
agreement as legal counsel but he could secure a special power of 
attorney from the heirs of Van Twest if such is required by the 
defendants for the settlement.  Atty. Allado replied that a special 
power of attorney from the heirs would be an admission that Van Twest is
 dead.  Atty. Perez insisted that he is the only general counsel or 
representative as regards Van Twestâs properties in the Philippines 
involved in litigation and could warrant that his acts will not be 
repudiated especially if the terms of the settlement are reasonable, the
 same is approved by the court and judgment based on compromise is 
issued.  With the assurances made by Atty. Perez that his acts will not 
be repudiated by Van Twest or his heirs, Atty. Allado appeared satisfied
 and we proceeded to discuss the terms of the settlement.


6.  Atty. Allado later suggested that the terms of settlement be 
discussed with his clients, Ms. Anacleto and Engr. Bongar.  Attys. 
Perez, Allado and myself met with Ms. Anacleto and Engr. Bongar.  Ms. 
Anacleto and Engr. Bongar also inquired as to the authority of Atty. 
Perez.  Atty. Perez told Ms. Anacleto and Engr. Bongar the same 
explanation he gave to Atty. Allado.  Apparently satisfied, the terms of
 settlement were discussed.  No agreement came out of the first meeting.
 Another meeting was held at which Atty. Perez, Atty. Allado, Ms. 
Anacleto and myself were present.  Atty. Perez and Ms. Anacleto were not
 able to agree on the terms during the second meeting.


7.  After another meeting between Atty. Perez and Ms. Anacleto, I was informed that the talks bogged down.


8.  Atty. Perez called later and asked me to make another proposal with 
Atty. Allado, more particularly on the amount, terms and manner of 
payment.  The proposal was eventually accepted and the Compromise 
Agreement was executed by Attys. Allado and Perez on behalf of their 
respective clients.


9.  I execute this affidavit to attest to the truth of the foregoing.


19 January 1996 at Makati City, Philippines.




     (SGD.) CRISPULO C. ROSACIA, JR.
  





We hold that estoppel does not apply.  The affidavit of Atty. Rosacia 
shows that although petitionerâs former counsel knew that Atty. Perez 
had no SPA, said counsel nonetheless negotiated with him because of his 
representation that he was the representative of Van Twest as to the 
latterâs properties in the Philippines and that he could secure an SPA 
from the heirs of Van Twest.  This is why the negotiations did not fall 
through.   Petitioner was thus well within her right in relying upon 
this representation of Atty. Perez.


Of importance is paragraph 5 of the compromise agreement which provides 
that â[t]he signatories to this Agreement hereby represent and warrant 
that they are duly authorized to execute this Agreement.â By virtue of 
this provision, petitioner had the right to require Atty. Perez to 
secure the necessary authority from Van Twest or the latterâs heirs as 
well as from Euroceanic.  Indeed, petitioner cannot be faulted for 
treating this warranty as a condition precedent to her compliance with 
the compromise agreement since the requirement of special authority is 
mandatory
[12]
  and a lawyerâs authority to compromise cannot simply be presumed.
[13]
  This is the thrust of the urgent omnibus motion
[14]

  filed by petitioner in the trial court in which she asked that the 
court require Atty. Perez to show an SPA in accordance with paragraph 5 
of their agreement.  That this was done by petitioner after the 
compromise agreement was approved by the court is of no moment for, as 
just stated, it was the nullity of the judgment itself that was put in 
issue by petitioner.


Indeed, it may be asked, what injury will result in nullifying a 
contract in which one of the parties is not represented and where the 
only claim of the opposing counsel is that the contracting party knew of
 such fact and belatedly raised such issue?  Equity, on which the 
principle of estoppel is based, is simply not on the side of Atty. 
Perez.  The risk of sustaining the decision of the Court of Appeals is 
that of requiring petitioner to pay a debt to a stranger,
[15]

  and we cannot just rely on the guaranty of Atty. Perez that he would 
hold any money he receives in the cases he has filed in trust for Van 
Twest and/or Euroceanic.  In addition, there is no stopping Van Twest 
and/or Euroceanic from suing petitioner again for the same cause of 
action if they are unable to recover the money from Atty. Perez.  In 
fact, the law does not even require them to recognize the trust 
unilaterally created by Atty. Perez or first seek to recover from him.



Third.
  It is nonetheless contended that, under the 
law, the compromise agreement, once approved by the court, becomes 
executory in the absence of a motion to set aside the judgment thereon 
on the ground of fraud, mistake, etc. and that a party questioning the 
judgment on compromise must not only move to set aside the judgment but 
must also move to set aside or annul the compromise agreement itself.
[16]



This contention has no merit.  The principles cited refer to the 
annulment of voidable compromise agreements.  But here, the compromise 
agreement is void.  A void contract does not become valid and 
enforceable merely because it is based on a judgment upon compromise, 
and, as we have held, can be impugned in any proceeding.  We see no need
 for petitioner to wait until a writ of execution is issued against her 
before resorting to 
certiorari
 or petition for annulment of judgment to impugn the validity of the compromise agreement.



Fourth
.  It is true that petitioner tried to appeal to 
the Court of Appeals from the order of the trial court denying her 
motion to vacate the judgment based on the compromise agreement and that
 petitionerâs notice of appeal was filed twelve days late.  It was for 
this reason that the trial court denied petitionerâs appeal.  
Petitioner, therefore, filed a petition for 
certiorari
.


It is within the inherent power of the Court to suspend its own rules in a particular case in order to do justice.
[17]

  Considering the obvious merit of petitionerâs cause and the unusual 
circumstances present in this case, the procedural miscalculation on the
 part of petitioner may be overlooked.  For equitable considerations, we
 have relaxed the application of otherwise stringent rules by giving due
 course to appeals filed out of time,
[18]
  treating petitions for certiorari as petitions for review,
[19]
  and remanding cases for trial even though their previous dismissal had become final.
[20]

  In the case at bar, the fact that, for all intents and purposes, this 
case has been litigated up to this Court with only one party being 
properly represented and the alleged counsel for the other admits he has
 no authority to litigate this case is a good reason for a liberal 
application of the rules.



WHEREFORE,
 the decision of the Court of Appeals dismissing petitionerâs action for 
certiorari

 is hereby REVERSED and, consequently, the decision of the Regional 
Trial Court, Branch 7, Manila, based on the compromise agreement of the 
parties, is ANNULLED and SET ASIDE and the compromise agreement itself 
is declared without force and effect.


SO ORDERED.



Quisumbing, Buena,
 and 
De Leon, Jr., JJ.,
 concur.
    


Bellosillo, (Chairman), J.
, no part.  Related to one of parties.









[1]
 CA Rollo, pp. 16-20. 



[2]
  CIVIL CODE, ART. 2028.



[3]
  CIVIL CODE, ART. 1318.



[4]
  CA Rollo, p. 56.



[5]
  CIVIL CODE , ART. 2033.



[6]
  Vicente v. Geraldez, 52 SCRA 210 (1973).



[7]
  189 SCRA 107 (1990).



[8]
  64 Phil. 301 (1937).



[9]
  19 SCRA 513 (1967).



[10]
  265 SCRA 172 (1996).



[11]
  CA Rollo, pp. 52-55.



[12]
  Supra note 9.



[13]
  Home Insurance Co. v. United States Lines Co., 21 SCRA 863 (1967).



[14]
  Records, pp. 28-30.



[15]
  See CIVIL CODE, ARTS. 1240 & 1241.



[16]
  Mobil Oil, Inc. v. CFI, 208 SCRA 523 (1992); Arkoncel v. Lagamon, 204 SCRA 560 (1991).



[17]
  Ordoveza v. Raymundo, 63
 Phil. 275 (1936); Sollorano v. Court of Appeals, 62 SCRA 478 (1975); 
Banez v. Court of Appeals, 94 SCRA 756 (1979).



[18]
  Velasco v. Gayapa, 152 
SCRA 440 (1987); Siguenza v. Court of Appeals, 137 SCRA 570 (1985); 
Ramos v. Bagasao, 96 SCRA 395 (1980); Republic v. Court of Appeals, 83 
SCRA 453 (1978); Rodriguez v. Court of Appeals, 68 SCRA 262 (1975); 
Reyes v. Court of Appeals, 74 Phil. 235 (1943).



[19]
  Nerves v. Civil Service Commission, 276 SCRA 610 (1997).



[20]
  Rafael Reyes Trucking Corporation v. People, G.R. No.129029, April 3, 2000.





 


Source: Supreme Court E-Library 
		
This page was dynamically generated 
		
by the E-Library Content Management System (E-LibCMS)