E-Library - Information At Your Fingertips: Printer Friendly




    

			393 Phil. 683
			




EN BANC


[ G.R. No. 103797, August 30, 2000 ]


PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION ON GOOD GOVERNMENT, PETITIONER, VS. THE HONORABLE SANDIGANBAYAN (THIRD DIVISION), AEROCOM INVESTORS AND MANAGERS, INC., POLYGON INVESTORS AND MANAGERS, INC., TRADERS ROYAL BANK, HECTOR P. CORPUS, AND SEVERINO P. BUAN, JR., RESPONDENTS.

D E C I S I O N




YNARES-SANTIAGO, J.:


This is a Petition for 
Certiorari 
with Urgent Prayer for 
Preliminary Mandatory Injunction, on the ground of grave abuse of 
discretion amounting to excess of jurisdiction caused by the 
Sandiganbayanâs issuance of three Resolutions dated December 10, 1991, 
January 27, 1992 and January 29, 1992, in Civil Case No. 0114, entitled â
Philippine
 Communications Satellite Corporation (PHILCOMSAT) and Philippine 
Overseas Telecommunications Corporation (POTC), Plaintiffs versus 
Presidential Commission on Good Government (PCGG), Defendant.
â


The Presidential Commission on Good Government (PCGG), in a letter-order
 dated March 14, 1986, sequestered the shares of stock in POTC and 
PHILCOMSAT owned by Jose L. Africa and Roberto S. Benedicto, two of 
several known close associates of then President Marcos.  The 
letter-order requested Carlos M. Farrales, of New Manila, Quezon City, 
to do the following:




    (S)equester and immediately take over the following establishments, 
as well as all assets, funds, and records thereof, to wit:
  



    1.  PHILIPPINE OVERSEAS COMMUNICATION, INC. (PHILCOMSAT/POTC) 
including SUBMARINE CABLE NETWORK at Currimao, Ilocos Norte and the 
PHILIPPINE EARTH STATION at Pinugay, Tanay;
  



    2.  EASTERN TELECOMMUNICATIONS, INCORPORATED including TROPOSCATTER 
SYSTEM at Sto. Tomas, Baguio and MICROWAVE SYSTEM at San Fernando, 
Pampanga;
  



    3.  PHILIPPINE LONG DISTANCE TELEPHONE COMPANY;
  



    4.  DOMESTIC SATELLITE at the Domsat Station;
  





and all other subsidiary organizations emanating therefrom.


In this connection, you are hereby named Officer-in-Charge of all the 
above-named companies.  As such, you are requested to immediately freeze
 all the withdrawals, transfers, and/or remittances from the funds of 
the above-enumerated companies under any type of deposit accounts, trust
 accounts or placements, with the exception of those which are necessary
 for maintaining the ordinary course of business.
[1]



Accordingly, writs of sequestration were issued by the PCGG over POTC 
and PHILCOMSAT.  On March 29, 1991, POTC and PHILCOMSAT filed before the
 Sandiganbayan Civil Case No. 0114, for 
certiorari 
and 
injunction, seeking to nullify the writs of sequestration and to enjoin 
PCGG and its officers, agents and nominees from interfering with the 
management and operation of said corporations.  Plaintiffs hinged their 
petition on the argument that since the PCGG had failed to institute the
 corresponding judicial action required under Article XVIII, Section 26,
 second paragraph of the 1987 Philippine Constitution,
[2]
 the assailed writs of sequestration issued against them had long ceased to be effective.


The PCGG opposed the petition, arguing that the sequestration was in 
full force and effect, belying the plaintiff-corporationsâ contention 
that the PCGG had failed to file the mandated judicial action.  On the 
contrary, the PCGG alleged, there was pending before the Sandiganbayan 
Civil Case No. 0009, filed on July 22, 1987 â well within the period 
allowed by the cited constitutional provision.  One of the named 
defendants therein was Jose L. Africa, allegedly a stockholder with 
controlling interest in POTC and PHILCOMSAT.  The 
plaintiff-corporations, however, were not named party-defendants in 
Civil Case No. 0009.  Nevertheless, the PCGG contended that the filing 
of the case against Jose L. Africa, despite the fact that the 
plaintiff-corporations were not impleaded as party-defendants, satisfied
 the Constitutional provision requiring judicial action against these 
sequestered corporations.


On August 8, 1991, POTC and PHILCOMSAT filed a motion for summary 
judgment, submitting for resolution the sole issue of whether or not 
Civil Case No. 0009 pending before the Sandiganbayan is the judicial 
action contemplated and required under Section 26, Article XVIII of the 
1987 Constitution, considering that said corporations were not impleaded
 as defendants in the said case.


The Sandiganbayan found for the plaintiffs POTC and PHILCOMSAT, ruling 
that the PCGG failed to institute any judicial action directly against 
the plaintiff-corporations.  While Jose L. Africa was a stockholder of 
said corporations, the latter have a legal personality distinct and 
separate from their stockholders.  Thus, a suit against any of their 
stockholders is not ipso facto a suit against the corporations 
themselves.


Consequently, the Sandiganbayan issued a Resolution in Civil Case No. 
0114, promulgated on December 4, 1991, disposing as follows:


The writs of sequestration over the herein plaintiff-corporations were 
issued on March 14, 1986 and April 11, 1986, or before the ratification 
of the Constitution on February 2, 1987.  The record does not show, 
however, that a judicial action has been filed against the 
plaintiff-corporations from the date of their sequestration up to August
 2, 1987 or six months after the ratification of the Constitution.  On 
the other hand, what appears in the record is the Certification of the 
Acting Clerk of Court of this Court, Atty. Luisabel Alfonso-Cortez, that
 no case has been filed against the plaintiff-corporations as of August 
5, 1991 (Annex âAâ, Motion). (Underscoring ours)


It is our view, therefore, and We so hold that for the failure of 
defendant PCGG to file the corresponding judicial action against 
plaintiff-corporations, PHILCOMSAT and POTC, within the period mandated 
in Section 26 of Article XVIII of the 1987 Constitution, the writs of 
sequestration issued against them are deemed automatically lifted.


WHEREFORE, the Motion for Summary Judgment is hereby granted.  As prayed for, summary judgment is hereby rendered as follows:




    1)  The sequestration of herein plaintiff-corporations, Philcomsat and POTC, is hereby declared lifted;
  



    2)  Defendant PCGG, its Commissioners, other officers, employees, 
agents, representatives, nominees and designees, are hereby ENJOINED 
from preventing disbursements by the plaintiff-corporations, and from 
doing any other act that would in any way interfere with, hinder or 
hamper the management and operation of plaintiff-corporations; and
  



    3)  Declaring as null and void all acts of sequestration against plaintiff-corporations as of August 2, 1987.
  





Without pronouncement as to costs.
[3]



In the meantime, prior to the above-quoted Resolution of the 
Sandiganbayan, an âUrgent Motion to Interveneâ in Civil Case No. 0114 
and another âUrgent Motion to Permit Intervenors to Receive their 
Dividends from the POTC,â both dated October 30, 1991, were filed by 
Aerocom Investors and Managers, Inc. (AEROCOM) and Polygon Investors and
 Managers, Inc. (POLYGON).  Intervenors AEROCOM and POLYGON alleged in 
their twin motions that they are the registered owners of 1,668 and 963 
unencumbered shares of stock in POTC, respectively; that the POTC had 
declared the distribution of cash dividends of P7,700.00 per share on 
June 14, 1988 and P14,970.00 per share on October 1, 1989; and that the 
PCGG refused to countersign the checks issued by POTC covering the 
dividends in favor of AEROCOM and POLYGON.  The intervenors further 
alleged that this belated objection of the PCGG is patently oppressive, 
moreso after considering that: (1) the PCGG allowed the intervenors to 
receive their dividends in the previous years, particularly those 
distributed on March 4, June 3 and October 9, 1986, as well as on 
December 3, 1987; and (2) the PCGG had left to the discretion of the 
Sandiganbayan the matter of payment of the 1989 dividends.


The PCGG opposed the intervenorsâ Motions stressing that the same should
 have been filed in Civil Case No. 009 and not in Civil Case No. 0114 
since the issues raised in the said motions are the same as those 
involved in Civil Case No. 009.


On December 10, 1991, the Sandiganbayan issued the first assailed 
Resolution granting both motions of the intervenors, for the following 
reasons:




    (1) AEROCOM and POLYGON have an interest in the matter under 
litigation in Civil Case No. 0114, or in the success of either parties, 
being the registered owners of 1,668 and 963 shares of stock, 
respectively, in POTC;
  



    (2) The writ of sequestration over POTC had already been previously 
lifted in the Resolution promulgated on December 4, 1991;
  



    (3) The Motion for Intervention was seasonably filed before the 
Sandiganbayan rendered judgment in Civil Case No. 0114 by way of the 
Resolution aforementioned;
  


 (4) The intervenorsâ shares of stock in POTC were never 
sequestered, thus they have a right to be paid their respective 
dividends for the years 1988 and 1989; and the PCGG has no authority to 
withhold the release thereof; and 


 (5) Further delay would unduly deprive the intervenors AEROCOM and
 POLYGON of the dividends they are legally entitled to, and the PCGGâs 
stubborn refusal to have the funds released by the depository bank is 
unreasonably discriminating against the intervenors. 





Consequently, the Sandiganbayan disposed, to wit:



WHEREFORE, 
premises considered, the âUrgent Motion to 
Interveneâ and âUrgent Motion to Permit Intervenors to Receive their 
Dividends from the Philippine Overseas Telecommunications Corporationâ 
filed by Aerocom Investors and Managers, Inc. and Polygon Investors and 
Managers, Inc. are hereby GRANTED.


Accordingly, this Court hereby directs the immediate payment to 
intervenors Aerocom and Polygon of their dividends from the Philippine 
Overseas Telecommunications Corporation on their 1,668 and 963 POTC 
shares, respectively.  Said payment would cover dividends for the years 
1988 and 1989 in the amount of P7,700 and P14,970 per share, 
respectively, together with the interests due thereon from their due 
dates up to the dates of actual payment.  For this purpose, the 
Presidential Commission on Good Government (PCGG), its representatives 
or agents is hereby mandated to immediately lift any restriction on the 
issuance, release and/or payment to herein movants-intervenors of any 
and all checks, vouchers, and the like appertaining to the aforesaid 
cash dividends.  Furthermore, PCGG is ordered to report to this Court in
 writing, compliance with the foregoing directive, within fifteen (15) 
days from receipt hereof.


SO ORDERED.
[4]



The PCGG filed a Motion for Reconsideration arguing that the filing of 
Civil Case No. 0009 seeking, among others, to recover the ill-gotten 
wealth of the beneficial owners of POTC, AEROCOM and POLYGON was, in 
effect, faithful compliance with the pertinent constitutional 
requirement.  Although the said corporations were not impleaded as 
defendants therein, the Sandiganbayan should have allowed the PCGG to 
pierce the veil of corporate fiction of these corporations and to 
present evidence to prove that these dummy corporations were 
machinations by which  the named defendants in Civil Case No. 0009, such
 as Jose L. Africa, acquired their ill-gotten wealth.  Furthermore, the 
PCGG contended that the matter of who is rightfully entitled to the 
dividends declared by these corporations can only be resolved together 
with the issues pending before the Sandiganbayan in Civil Case No. 0009.
  Accordingly, the PCGG had the authority to withhold the release of the
 disputed dividends until final resolution of Civil Case No. 0009.


For their part, intervenors AEROCOM and POLYGON filed an Ex-Parte Motion
 for Clarification asking the Sandiganbayan to reaffirm the immediate 
effectivity of the Resolution dated December 10, 1991 and also to direct
 the Traders Royal Bank to honor and pay immediately the amounts stated 
in Check Nos. 382450 and 382451 without need of PCGG approval.  The 
intervenors also moved to strike out PCGGâs Motion for Reconsideration 
on the ground that it was filed out of time and, therefore, was merely 
pro forma and dilatory.


On January 27, 1992, the Sandiganbayan issued the second assailed 
Resolution denying both the PCGGâs Motion for Reconsideration and the 
intervenorsâ clarificatory motion.  The Sandiganbayan reaffirmed its 
earlier Resolution dated December 10, 1991, to wit:


At the outset, it bears repeating that the arguments presented by 
defendant PCGG in support of the subject motion have all been squarely 
met and disposed of by this Court in Our previous Resolutions.  PCGG 
adamantly insists that the filing of Civil Case No. 0009 which is 
purportedly a suit against the so-called beneficial owners of POTC, 
Aerocom, and Polygon, is compliance with Sec. 26, Art. XVIII of the 1987
 Constitution, thereby maintaining the efficacy of the writ of 
sequestration it issued against POTC.  We cannot sustain such a view.  
These corporations, to wit:  POTC, Aerocom and Polygon were never 
impleaded in such civil case.  The fact that defendant PCGG raises the 
argument that the beneficial owners of these corporations were impleaded
 as parties-defendants in said case could only be interpreted as a tacit
 admission of its patent failure to file the corresponding judicial 
action against them pursuant to the constitutional mandate.  As such, 
the writ of sequestration it issued over POTC should be deemed to have 
been automatically lifted.  Moreover, to paraphrase the words of the 
Supreme Court in Republic of the Philippines vs. Sandiganbayan, et al. 
(August 12, 1991, G.R. No. 92376), whether or not the impleaded 
defendants in Civil Case No. 0009 are indeed the beneficial owners of 
POTC, Aerocom, and Polygon is a matter which defendant PCGG merely 
assumes and still has to prove in said case.  All told, defendant PCGG 
fails to convince Us that the automatic lifting of the writ of 
sequestration over POTC is not founded on solid factual and legal 
grounds.


With respect to the propriety of applying the doctrine of piercing the 
veil of corporate identity, We reiterate Our earlier holding that the 
application of said principle would only come into play once the Court 
has already acquired jurisdiction over the corporation.  Since this 
Court has not acquired jurisdiction over POTC in Civil Case No. 0009, 
precisely because it was not impleaded therein as a party defendant, 
said contention cannot be upheld.


Finally, defendant PCGG alleges that the motion filed by intervenors 
Aerocom and Polygon should have been treated as an incident in Civil 
Case No. 0009.  We do not think so.   By reason of the fact that POTC is
 not even a party in Civil Case No. 0009, herein intervenors do not have
 any interest in the subject matter of litigation therein as required by
 Sec. 2, Rule 12 of the Revised Rules of Court.  Contrast this with the 
situation in the present case wherein intervenors Aerocom and Polygon 
are shareholders of plaintiff POTC and as such, have sufficient interest
 to intervene, as in fact said intervention has been allowed by this 
Court in the Resolution sought to be reconsidered.  Suffice it to state 
that the propriety of Aerocom and Polygonâs intervention in the 
above-entitled case has not been successfully challenged.


WHEREFORE, for the aforestated reasons, the âUrgent Motion (a) to strike
 out Motion for Reconsideration for being filed out of time; pro-forma 
and purely dilatory of frivolous, (b) for Immediate Execution of the 
December 10, 1991 Resolutionâ filed by intervenors Aerocom Investors and
 Managers, Inc. and Polygon Investors and Managers, Inc. is hereby 
DENIED for lack of merit.


On the other hand, the âMotion for Reconsiderationâ filed by defendant 
Presidential Commission on Good Government (PCGG) is likewise hereby 
DENIED for lack of merit.  Accordingly, the Resolution of this Court 
dated December 10, 1991 is affirmed.


SO ORDERED.
[5]



On January 29, 1992, the Sandiganbayan issued the third assailed Resolution, to wit:


Acting on the âEx-Parte Motion for Clarificationâ filed by intervenors 
Aerocom Managers and Investors, Inc. and Polygon Managers and Investors,
 Inc. on December 16, 1991 and considering our Resolutions of December 
10, 1991 and January 27, 1992, We find the same to be impressed with 
merit.  Accordingly, Traders Royal Bank is hereby directed to 
immediately honor and pay Check Nos. 382450 and 382451 issued by 
Philippine Overseas Telecommunications Corporation (POTC) in favor of 
Aerocom Managers and Investors, Inc. and Polygon Managers and Investors,
 Inc., representing dividend payments to the latter for the years 1988 
and 1989, as previously indicated in the aforementioned Resolution of 
December 10, 1991.


SO ORDERED.
[6]



Hence, the instant petition for ifiled by the PCGG assailing the three 
(3) Sandiganbayan Resolutions, ascribing to the said court grave abuse 
of discretion amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction in issuing the
 same, contending that these Resolutions are not only conflicting, but 
also without basis.  The PCGG further stressed that the implementation 
of these Resolutions will dissipate beyond retrieval ill-gotten wealth 
which the State, through the PCGG, has been trying to recover from the 
Marcos family, their cronies, dummies, relatives and other nominees.  In
 this particular instance, the amount involved is not a measly sum as 
the State stands to lose a total of P59,644,770.00.


On the first Resolution dated December 10, 1991, the PCGG claims that 
the same was issued with grave abuse of discretion because the 
Sandiganbayan granted the Motion to Intervene as well as the relief 
sought by the intervenors even before they could file their 
complaint-in-intervention, thus depriving the PCGG opportunity to file 
its answer thereto.


We do not agree.  The intervenorsâ âUrgent Motion to Interveneâ was not 
for the purpose of filing a complaint against any of the principal 
parties in Civil Case No. 0114, but only to ask the Sandiganbayan for 
leave to file the âUrgent Motion to Permit the Intervenors to Receive 
their Dividends from POTC,â while the main case was pending.  By the 
time the Sandiganbayan resolved the intervenorsâ Motions, it had already
 rendered judgment declaring the writ of sequestration lifted and of no 
effect. Thus, there was no more obstacle to the intervenorsâ receipt of 
the dividends from POTC.  Intervenors AEROCOM and POLYGON had no cause 
or intention to file a complaint-in-intervention so there was no need or
 reason for the PCGG to answer.


Be that as it may, the PCGG was not totally deprived of the opportunity 
to oppose the intevenorsâ Motions.  The records reveal that the Motions 
were filed on October 30, 1991 and a hearing thereof was held on 
November 4, 1991.  The PCGG failed to appear at the scheduled hearing, 
prompting a certain Atty. Gregorio Ejercito, Jr. to enter a special 
appearance and to request that the PCGG be given five (5) days within 
which to file its opposition to the intervenorsâ Motions.  Accordingly, 
the Sandiganbayan issued an Order granting the PCGG five (5) days, or 
until November 9, 1991 to file its opposition.
[7]

 And yet, it took the PCGG eighteen (18) more days after the lapse of 
the five-day period granted by the Sandiganbayan to file a motion for 
leave to admit its opposition to the intervenorsâ Motions.
[8]



If the PCGG now feels that it was denied its day in court, it has only 
itself to blame.  Not only did the PCGG fail to appear during the 
scheduled hearing, but its opposition to the intervenorsâ Motions was 
also filed way beyond the period given by the Sandiganbayan.  Be that as
 it may, the Sandiganbayan was lenient enough to admit the belated 
opposition.


Contrary to what the PCGG would like this Court to believe, the PCGG was
 given ample time and opportunity to oppose the intervenorsâ Motions.  
Thus, the Sandiganbayan issued the first assailed Resolution on December
 10, 1991 granting both Motions, only after both parties have been 
heard, hence, no grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack or excess 
of jurisdiction was committed by the Sandiganbayan.
[9]



The second assailed Resolution dated January 27, 1992, denied the PCGGâs
 Motion for Reconsideration of the Resolution dated December 10, 1991.


We find the denial of the PCGGâs Motion for Reconsideration proper and 
well-supported by the facts.  The only issue raised in the Motions filed
 by the intervenors was whether or not AEROCOM and POLYGON are entitled 
to the dividends declared for distribution by the POTC.  A review of the
 pleadings as well as the documentary evidence would readily show that, 
indeed, the intervenors are entitled thereto.


There is no doubt that AEROCOM and POLYGON are registered owners of 
shares of stock of POTC and as such, they received the dividends 
declared in 1986 and 1987 without objection from the PCGG.  The records 
also reveal that they have never been sequestered nor have there been 
any case filed against them by the PCGG.  POTC was not impleaded as a 
party-defendant in Civil Case No. 0009 and the writ of sequestration 
over the said corporation had long been lifted by the Sandiganbayan.  
There is nothing, therefore, that disqualifies or prevents the 
intervenors from receiving the questioned dividends.


In fact, the PCGG subsequently did not raise any objection to the 
distribution  of  dividends  in  the succeeding years.  In a letter 
dated January 16, 1992 addressed to the POTC, the then PCGG Chairman, 
David Castro, wrote:


âAs it was in the case of dividend payments out of the dividend 
declaration of September 28, 1989, we are leaving to the discretion of 
the Court (Sandiganbayan) the matter of the release of dividend checks 
for cash dividends declared last November 15, 1991.â
[10]
 (Underscoring ours)


Such being the case, there is no reason for the PCGG now to oppose the 
release of the 1988 and 1989 declared dividends to the 
intervenor-corporations.  The PCGGâs selective opposition is not only 
discriminatory because all the other stockholders have received their 
dividends, but it is also oppressive because, after all, the PCGG had 
already submitted to the discretion of the Sandiganbayan the release of 
the dividend checks.  Clearly, the issue of the questioned dividends has
 become moot and academic and the PCGG is estopped from asserting the 
authority to withhold the release of dividends to POTC stockholders, the
 intervenors included.


Finally, on the third assailed Resolution dated January 29, 1992, this 
Court finds no error in the Sandiganbayanâs directive to the Traderâs 
Royal Bank to immediately honor and pay Check Nos. 382450 and 382451 
issued by the POTC in favor of the intervenor-corporations.


The records show that since the promulgation of the said Resolution on 
December 10, 1991, fifty (50) days had elapsed before the Sandiganbayan 
implemented said Resolution and it was only on January 30, 1992 when the
 intervenor-corporations deposited the said checks.  Hence, there was no
 grave abuse of discretion on the part of the Sandiganbayan when it 
issued the third assailed Resolution directing the Traders Royal Bank to
 honor and pay the subject dividend checks in favor of the 
intervenor-corporations.



WHEREFORE
, in view of all the foregoing, the instant petition is hereby DISMISSED for lack of merit.


No pronouncement as to costs.

SO ORDERED. 


Davide, Jr., C.J., Bellosillo, Melo, Puno, Vitug, Kapunan, Mendoza, Quisumbing, Purisima, Pardo, Buena, 
and 
Gonzaga-Reyes, JJ.,
 concur. 


Panganiban, J.,
 no part being a former counsel of a party. 


De Leon, Jr., J.,
 no part. 









[1]
 Rollo, p. 69.

 
[2]
 A sequestration
 or freeze order shall be issued only upon showing of a prima facie 
case.  The order and the list of the sequestration or frozen properties 
shall forthwith be registered with the proper court.  For orders issued 
before the ratification of this Constitution, the corresponding judicial
 action or proceedings shall be filed within six months from its 
ratification.  For those issued after such ratification, the judicial 
action or proceeding shall be commenced within six months from the 
issuance thereof.



[3]
 Rollo, pp. 66-68; 
Associate Justice Sabino R. de Leon, Jr., ponente; Associate Justices 
Conrado M. Molina and Augusto M. Amores, concurring.



[4]
 Rollo, pp. 20-21; Justice Augusto M. Amores, ponente; Justices Conrado M. Molina and Sabino R. de Leon, Jr., concurring.



[5]
 Rollo, pp. 26-28.



[6]
 Rollo, p. 29.



[7]
 Order dated November 4, 1991; Records, p. 190.



[8]
 PCGGâs Opposition to Motion for Intervention; Records, p. 205.



[9]
 Cuision v. CA, 289 SCRA 159 (1998); Esguerra v. CA, 267 SCRA 380 (1997).



[10]
 Rollo, p. 54.





 


Source: Supreme Court E-Library 
		
This page was dynamically generated 
		
by the E-Library Content Management System (E-LibCMS)